>>>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC] And
I think many people today
don't know what to
believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>I felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
You know, since the
beginning of time,
mankind has been fascinated
with the heavens, things
that have been
going on in space.
But who is out there to record
these incredible stories?
Bob Zimmerman is our special
guest on Beyond Belief today.
Noted author, several
of his works "Genesis:
The story of Apollo 8,"
and also "Leaving Earth,"
and so much more.
His special website, of
course, behindtheblack.com,
is one of those websites
I go to all the time
when I want current
space information
and historical space news.
Welcome to "Beyond
Belief," Bob Zimmerman.
Bob, always a pleasure.
>>BOB ZIMMERMAN:
It's a pleasure.
It's really great.
Thank you for having me.
>>NOORY: How did you get
so interested in space?
Because I was as a kid.
>>ZIMMERMAN: I was as a kid, I
was growing up during the '60s.
The space program was happening.
You know, in the
second grade they
would wheel those giant
TVs into our classroom
when John Glenn was
going to take off
and we'd watch it happen.
And so, you know,
you get into it.
This is the future.
That's how I saw
the future coming.
And I wanted at least be part
of that future in some manner.
And so that's always
been a passion to me,
to see what's going on
in space and find out
what the future is
going to be like.
Because that's where the
future's going to be,
it's in space.
>>NOORY: When I was
about 13, 14 years old,
my parents got me my
very first telescope,
and I was just fascinated by it.
And I was a kid
growing up in Detroit.
They got it for
me for Christmas.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Yeah.
>>NOORY: It was a
cold December night.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Yeah.
>>NOORY: I took it outside
and I'm adjusting it
so I could have my little
spot star finder there
and everything else.
And it was a three inch
telescope, a refractor.
And I remember
aiming it at Saturn.
And, of course,
with the naked eye
you see what looks
like a little star,
but with this powerful
little telescope,
you can see the rings of Saturn.
And, Bob, it was
as if somebody had
painted a picture out there.
I was mesmerized by it.
I had never seen anything
like that before.
And the wonderment of space
for me just opened up.
And I couldn't get enough.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well,
you just described
my-- I had almost an identical
experience, George, in New York
City.
And what struck me
when I first got
my first glimpse of the moons
of Jupiter and Saturn's rings
through a telescope--
you know, I
had seen pictures of
those as a kid growing up.
We had telescopes
and had been taking
pictures of those for centuries.
But to see it in real
life, you suddenly
realize that there's
magic out there.
Behind the Black, my
website, well that title
comes from when the
astronauts were on the moon
and the sky is pitch black.
It's black.
Well what's behind that black?
And so you look at the star
of Saturn, it's just a dot.
It's a bright star speck.
You take a telescope
out and you look at it,
you're suddenly seeing
behind the black
that there are rings there.
And so the whole human endeavor
is looking behind the black,
find out what's
there, what's hidden,
and from that we learn and
we find out great things.
It's always more
interesting than we
expect it's going to be,
always more fascinating.
And that's space, that's
why I got into it.
It's very exciting,
very interesting stuff.
Wherever you go, you'll
always be surprised.
Do not assume at any point
that a scientific endeavor
is going to find
a boring result.
If anything, it's
always going to be
much more exciting and
perplexing than originally
thought by the
scientists themselves.
>>NOORY: There's
so many things I
want to talk with you about
tonight, Bob-- the Apollo
missions, and
where we're headed,
and what's going to happen
with our space program.
But a question like
just looking at Saturn,
what keeps that planet from
plunging into the universe?
It's just, it's always there.
It's uniform.
It rotates.
It stays there.
It's in our solar system.
Why aren't we just falling
all over the place?
Why are we just there
floating around?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well
you know, you got
the laws of physics,
Newton's laws.
That's part of the
mysteries of science.
We learn things, we
find out how things are.
We find out, for
example, they thought
the Earth was once in the
center of the universe, center
of the universe.
Well, we learn more
that's hidden from us.
We have to dig a
little bit to discover
that the sun is in the center
of the universe, not the Earth.
And the same thing with Saturn.
You know Saturn's
rings are really
interesting from a
scientific perspective
because at first scientists
used say, well, that's
a very temporary phenomenon.
It's very unusual, it's not
really going to be there a lot.
Well what we're learning now is
that the formation of planets
mimics what we
see around Saturn.
The rings of Saturn are
giving us actually a prototype
of what a planetary
system will look
like in its initial formation.
So we can learn-- in fact, just
this week they took pictures
with Cassini of what
might be a moon.
>>NOORY: Forming in the ring.
>>ZIMMERMAN: In the ring.
We're actually watching
the possibility
of the possible formation of
a moon in the ring of Saturn
right now.
I mean, that's incredibly cool.
I mean, you know, if you
told me 10 years ago,
oh, we're going to see
the formation of moons,
I'd say that's ridiculous.
It happened millions,
billions of years ago.
>>NOORY: Could those
rings be possible moons?
>>ZIMMERMAN: It's possible.
Once again, it's a
learning experience.
We do not know how a
planetary proplyd ring of dust
turns into a solar
system like ours.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>ZIMMERMAN: And there's
a process that goes on.
Saturn might be an
example of a case
where it just never
gets to that stage
of a solar system,
a mini solar system.
But then maybe it's just taking
its time, it's a slow process.
This is science.
This is what's interesting
about the universe,
and the mysteries
are worth exploring.
>>NOORY: We may
literally be watching
the birth of another planetary
system right before our eyes.
>>ZIMMERMAN: That's right.
And isn't that cool?
>>NOORY: It may take
millions of years, right?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well, you know.
>>NOORY: Wouldn't it be nice if
they could do it in two weeks?
Come on.
Let's do it.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Now, well, if
it happened in two weeks
it could be a little
disastrous in other ways.
You know, it could be--
things could happen
that we don't expect and then
we might be suffering from that.
>>NOORY: Your book, "Genesis:
The Story of Apollo 8,"
now available as an ebook.
Tell me about this story
and why you wrote it.
>>ZIMMERMAN: I wrote that book
because when I was growing up
I thought Apollo 8, that
mission to the moon,
that was the first time human
beings left Earth orbit, where
astronauts actually
were going somewhere.
It was a very
interesting moment.
They're in orbit around the
Earth like every other mission
before then, and most
missions since then.
And they suddenly make
a decision, OK, we'll
go to the TLI, we're
gonna go to the moon.
And they fire the rockets.
So, remember this, they're
actually going somewhere.
And they are the
first humans-- that
was the first time humans
ever went to another planet.
There will never be
another first time
that humans go to
another planet.
So I thought from
that perspective,
this is an important mission.
And then I remembered when I was
growing up and this happened,
this mission had significant
cultural influence,
much more than the
Apollo 11 landing.
The perspective that the
astronauts brought to Earth
from the moon while
they were in lunar orbit
and traveling to
and from the moon
influenced American
culture significantly.
And I thought this
story should be told.
It had kind of been
forgotten since the '60s.
And, you know, people have
focused on the Apollo 11
mission completely and they
don't really talk about this.
So I said a book needs
to be written about this
because, in many ways, this
was the most important mission.
And I spoke to a
lot of astronauts
since from that
time period and they
agree this was the most
significant mission, partly
because of the risks involved.
They went thinking
the odds were good,
thinking the odds
were 50/50 of success.
>>NOORY: And success
would be what?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Getting back alive.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>ZIMMERMAN: They thought the
chances of getting back alive
were 50/50.
>>NOORY: 50/50.
>>ZIMMERMAN: And they
thought those were good odds.
>>NOORY: Just by going
around the moon--
>>ZIMMERMAN: That's right.
>>NOORY: --they thought
they only had a 50% chance--
>>ZIMMERMAN: One
of the dangers is--
>>NOORY: --of coming back.
>>ZIMMERMAN: --they did not
have the lunar module yet.
So that was a redundancy built
into the whole Apollo system.
So, for example, on
Apollo 13 the reason that
Jim Lovell as commander
survived, the Apollo--
>>NOORY: Wasn't Lovell on 8?
>>ZIMMERMAN: He was
on 8, that's correct.
If what happened to him
on 13 had happened on 8,
he would've been dead
in about 10 minutes.
>>NOORY: No place to go.
>>ZIMMERMAN: That's right.
And there would've been no
oxygen, no backup system.
So there was a great
risk with this mission
and we were willing to do
it for a lot of reasons.
And so this needed to be told.
So that's why I wrote "Genesis,"
that's why it was written.
>>NOORY: When they went
around the moon, Bob,
was it just one turn and
then back to planet Earth
or did they go
around the moon, too?
>>ZIMMERMAN: No, they actually--
one of the risks of the mission
was they weren't just going
to zip around the moon
and come back.
They were going
to put themselves
into orbit around the moon
and stay there for 24 hours,
do 20 orbits.
And then they have to
get out of lunar orbit.
>>NOORY: And head back.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Head back.
Well, they only
had one engine that
could get them out
of orbit, once again.
This is a single point system.
If that engine didn't work,
they were stuck in lunar orbit.
>>NOORY: Oh my gosh.
Forever.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Forever.
And so there's great
gambles involved with this.
And incredible courage involved.
But these people take it
very matter of factly.
They expected-- they felt the
need to do it for the nation,
for the world was so great
that they went and did it.
And then the irony
that they were
in lunar orbit on Christmas eve.
>>NOORY: I remember that
Christmas eve saying.
You know, there
is a Santa Claus.
>>ZIMMERMAN: They
read from the Bible.
They read from the Bible.
That was what was interesting.
>>NOORY: That's why
you call it "Genesis."
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well, I
called it "Genesis"
because they read
from the Bible.
It was also genesis of
human exploration of space.
It's an interesting combination.
But they-- one of things
I wanted to find out
is how did the
decision come about
to read from the first 12 verses
of Genesis from the Bible?
Who made that decision?
Why did they make it?
What was the motive behind it?
What were they
trying to accomplish?
[AUDIO PLAYBACK]
>>"In the beginning, God created
the heaven and the earth.
And the earth was
without form and void,
and darkness was upon
the face of the deep."
[END AUDIO PLAYBACK]
>>ZIMMERMAN: And this is a
very significant cultural story
about America as well.
>>NOORY: It's huge
because I'm not
sure they would
permit it nowadays.
>>ZIMMERMAN: That's
exactly right.
That's also part of the cultural
influence of this mission
and how it changed America
for the next half century.
And that's what's really
interesting about space.
Space as a activity seems to
predict the future of nations.
Space in the '60s
predicted the future
the United States for the next
half century about our culture.
It also predicted the
future of the Soviet Union.
Their space program was the
first to be capitalistic.
And it laid the groundwork
for their nation
to become capitalistic and more
open to the rest of the world.
Well our space
program in the '60s
taught us to become
like the Soviet Union--
very government
based space program.
And what's really
interesting to me now
is that the space
program, or space effort,
in the United States
today is actually
predicting America's
future again.
Because our space program
right now is transitioning away
from government and it's
switching back to a more--
>>NOORY: It's going private.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Private
enterprise system.
And it's actually
ahead of the curve,
I think, of the rest of
the culture right now.
It's showing us the
way into the future.
This is what space seems to do.
Even though it has nothing to
do with changing cultures--
it has to do with exploring the
heavens-- it somehow tells us
how cultures are
changing down the road.
>>NOORY: Bob, do you think with
this privatization of space
that if a company wanted to
land another man on the moon,
that they could do
it relatively soon?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
Well, it's really interesting.
Private space, let's
talk about just
what's happened just yesterday.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Over the last
three days, or last weekend.
SpaceX, company by Elon Musk,
launched the Falcon 9 rocket
with the Dragon capsule on it.
This is a privately
built capsule
to bring cargo up to ISS.
And United States now has two
privately built companies.
Well, NASA was trying to
replace the shuttle for 40,
almost 35, 40 years, and
never really made it.
>>NOORY: Never got it done.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Never got it done.
Five years ago,
six years ago, NASA
decided to give contracts
to two companies
to replace cargo
capability to ISS.
In five years, two
private companies
have now have capsules
to get cargo up to ISS.
So the Falcon 9
launched, it successfully
launched Dragon into
orbit on Sunday.
Two days later, they put--
Dragon docked with ISS
and it brought cargo
to the station.
What's more significant
about that launch
though, is that
Falcon had on it legs.
And what SpaceX is
trying to do is actually
make it possible to bring that
first stage back to ground
so they could reuse it.
Now this is private enterprise
being innovative, and creative,
and competitive.
If they can get that
first stage reusable,
they reduce the cost of
launch significantly.
>>NOORY: Dramatically.
>>ZIMMERMAN: They can then
undercut everybody else.
And therefore they get
lots more customers.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>ZIMMERMAN: And
they make more money.
And then we have greater
capability to get into space.
Our rockets aren't
discarded anymore.
And then suddenly it becomes
possible for more customers
to enter the business.
So you get a whole revolution.
It's a revolution in space
exploration down the road.
And it means that the
possibilities become unlimited
because, think,
costs are going down,
people are being innovative,
and the possibilities
become limitless.
>>NOORY: So you like
the idea of NASA
basically handing it over
to private companies?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well,
you know, I don't
think NASA should have the
right to make that decision.
This is a free country, it
should be the private citizens
who make the decisions
such as this.
NASA should actually
get out of the way.
NASA's been in the way for
about 40 years now, George.
They have been reluctant to
let any private companies run
the show.
And instead, they've
tried to dictate terms
and the result is we
haven't got much done.
In the last five,
six years, they've
been forced to hand over
ownership of these rockets
and cargo capability
>>NOORY: Reluctantly, you think?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Reluctantly.
Oh, without question,
as management--
there are people at NASA
who are in favor of this,
but there are a lot
of people in NASA
who have been opposed to
it because it's a turf war.
That's been their turf,
they've controlled it,
and now they're
being told, no, you
won't own the rockets
for capsules anymore,
other companies will.
And some people in
NASA don't like that.
>>NOORY: They don't like that.
>>ZIMMERMAN: And
they fought this.
>>NOORY: It's a power play.
>>ZIMMERMAN: It's a power play.
But they're losing.
They're actually
losing this battle.
Right now we have--
>>BOB ZIMMERMAN: Is
it because of money?
>>ZIMMERMAN: It's
money, it's turf war.
I mean, some of it has to do
with just simply NASA-- a lot
of the engineers at
NASA, they'd like
to build the rockets themselves.
They'd like to.
And they're good
engineers at NASA.
>>NOORY: But aren't
those people getting
hired by the private companies?
>>ZIMMERMAN: They have to
be willing to leave NASA.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>ZIMMERMAN: A lot
of the people who
work for NASA-- when you've
got a good government
job with a good pension,
you don't want to leave.
So you stay there.
You keep your pension,
but then if NASA's not
building the rockets
anymore, you're not building.
Then it becomes
this moral dilemma.
Do I go where the cool work is?
Or do I stay here
with the good pension?
And it's a tough
decision for a lot.
>>NOORY: Tough call.
>>ZIMMERMAN: So a lot
of those NASA people
stay there and then fight
to keep the work at NASA.
And then a lot of the
people say, no, I'd
rather be building rockets.
And they go off and
they build the rockets.
In the next five
years, we're going
to have private companies
launching humans into space.
Private companies building
rockets, for profit,
putting humans into space.
Well, that is going
to be incredibly
exciting and different.
And they're going to
be doing it for profit.
Some of it's going to be just
put tourists up in space.
Some of it will be
to put astronauts up
in space for the government.
In this case, NASA is
just a customer, George.
All that they're
doing is they need
a way to get their
astronauts to ISS so they
buy the services from
a private company.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Some
of those companies
come like Dream Chaser.
Dream Chaser is a privately
built mini shuttle
and it's designed merely
to be able-- it's reusable,
it's designed to just bring
people up and down from ISS.
It could also bring cargo.
It's being built by a private
company, Sierra Nevada.
And for the purposes of getting
humans into space, for NASA,
to get their customers.
>>NOORY: It's perfect.
>>ZIMMERMAN: It's perfect
but, you know, once they've
got it operating and
they've got this spaceship,
they can sell the
services to others.
You can start putting
tourists into space.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>ZIMMERMAN: You've got a
private company, Bigelow,
that has its own modules.
They want to put
a space station.
>>NOORY: It wants a hotel.
>>ZIMMERMAN: It's a hotel.
It wants to have a hotel.
Well now you have
Dream Chaser could
provide the transportation
to get them to the hotel.
You'll start to see
private enterprise
in orbit irrelevant
of the government.
And then since there
are a lot more people
than there are governments
in the United States--
there's only one government,
the federal government,
but there's 250
million people-- you
get a lot more dreams and
ideas and possibilities.
And then the future is-- the
sky's the limit at that point.
>>NOORY: Bob, NASA seems to be
concentrating on rover missions
and things like that.
Why haven't the private
companies done that yet?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well, that's
an interesting question.
You know the guy who
runs SpaceX, Elon Musk,
he started out wanting-- when
he sold Paypal and he was now
a billionaire and he
had money to spare
and he really was interested
in space exploration--
his first idea was he was going
to build his own privately
built probe lander to Mars.
And that was what
he wanted to do.
>>NOORY: That's what he wanted.
>>ZIMMERMAN: He
wanted to do first,
go to Mars with a
private unmanned probe.
What he discovered was he could
afford to build the probe,
but he found he couldn't
afford to launch it.
And that's when the light
bulb went off and he said, oh.
There's money to be made
in the launch market
because nobody's competing.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>ZIMMERMAN: So will
private enterprise
eventually start doing
those kind of things?
I think they will.
For example, once you start
having hotels in orbit,
well the next step for a private
company will say, hey, maybe
we can make money having
tourists on the moon.
Well, then private
companies have
to start sending rovers to
the moon to do some research.
Where you going to
build your hotel?
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>ZIMMERMAN: So you start to
have private space doing that.
And in fact, that's
even happening now.
Google XPRIZE is going
on, Google Lunar XPRIZE.
That is actually
private companies--
>>NOORY: Is this part
of the old XPRIZE group?
>>ZIMMERMAN: It's the
next second generation
of the same XPRIZE.
But in this case, by 2015 put
an unmanned lander on the moon,
travel 500 feet--
500 meters, I'm
sorry-- and then send that
information back to Earth.
There are about 20
private companies
trying to build those
rovers right now.
And there's at least
three, I think,
have a credible chance
of actually putting
a rover on the moon by 2015.
And so that's privately
built, privately funded.
And so, once again, what's the
purpose of that some of it's
going to be they'll
have little telescopes,
you could actually
look at space.
You know, be an
amateur astronomer
and buy time on the telescope.
Some of them they're doing
tests, test mineralogy.
Because if a private hotel
wants to be built there,
they got to know where
to build it and how.
So I think, yes,
private enterprise
has the highest
potential of doing this.
You know what the best
benefit of private enterprise
is, George?
It's free.
>>NOORY: It is free.
>>ZIMMERMAN: It's free.
And that sounds strange.
No, it still costs
money, doesn't it?
Well, it does.
But you see--
>>NOORY: But not
from our pockets.
>>ZIMMERMAN: No, it's
not from our pocket.
The only people
who pay for it are
the ones who want to pay for it.
So if I give you
an example, NASA,
they've got to take tax dollars.
Some people don't want
to pay that money.
And so people argue about
well we should do it or not,
and then it gets
into big politics.
Private company, they sell
tickets to people who buy it,
willingly give the money.
The company that launches the
tourists, they make a profit.
So it doesn't cost
them anything.
They've made a profit.
They can funnel
some of that profit
back into upgrading
and new designs.
It's still doesn't
cost them anything.
They sell more tickets, that
gives them investment capital.
So it's free in the sense and
the potential then is endless,
because as long as you can
provide a product that people
will buy-- and people
want to buy this--
you can go for as
far as you want.
And so orbital space
hotels may be first,
but later it will be-- wouldn't
it be nice to do a hike?
>>NOORY: Do a weekend on Mars?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Do a
weekend on Mars.
You know, walk along the
rim of Copernicus Crater
and see the view.
That would be spectacular.
And people would--
once it's established,
people will want to do this
kind of thing without question.
>>NOORY: 5 years?
10 years?
20 years?
How far out?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well, we're
in a transition zone
right now in the United States.
We're switching from the
government model, the program
model-- you know, government
space program where everything
is dictated-- and it's switching
over now private enterprise,
which is more like
a space effort.
It's kind of chaotic--
no one program, no one
idea, many different people
with many different efforts.
That transition is
going to take probably
through the end of this decade.
But by the end of
this decade, by 2020,
it's going to be
firmly entrenched
that private companies will
be doing this for profit.
And once that happens,
the sky is the limit.
And, I mean, it's funny to
say but it's really true.
There's nothing that's going
to stop it at that point
because once there's profit
being made sending people
into space, well then
you can do anything.
>>NOORY: True.
>>ZIMMERMAN: And so then
in the '20s, in the '30s,
you're going to start to see
some really incredible things
going on.
>>NOORY: What about the
Chinese and the Russians?
They don't seem to be
private, doing this.
>>ZIMMERMAN: No, that's right.
They're still following
the government model,
the centralized top-down system.
>>NOORY: And we will continue
to have a military application
there right?
>>NOORY: We will,
there's no question.
You have security issues there.
And the Russians and
the Chinese, they're
competing with our private
companies in a sense.
They're just another
competing company, in a sense,
but they seem to
think the best way
to do it is from a government
model, work from the top down.
I wish them well.
I think the problem with that
is you're never as efficient,
you're never as
effective, and in the end
multiple competing private
companies for profit
are going to wipe you out.
You're just not going
to be able to compete.
>>NOORY: I think you're right.
>>ZIMMERMAN: That's at least
that's how I look at it.
>>NOORY: Why aren't we
working together closer
with the Russians
and the Chinese?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well, you
know, we work incredibly
close with the Russians on the
International Space Station.
>>NOORY: Well, we
need them to get up.
>>ZIMMERMAN: We
need to get them up
but they need us to
operate the station.
We provide the electrical power.
It is a mutual hands
closely grasped.
They cannot work
separate from each other.
If the Russians
said, we're not going
to take your astronauts up there
anymore, well we would say,
OK, well we're going to
shut the station down.
>>NOORY: And we have no choice.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well the
point is and they could not
stop us because we control
the power systems on it.
So it's a mutual thing.
We work close
together with them,
but the irony of that
close mutual cooperation
is that not that much gets done.
There are too many people
involved in the game.
For example, the
Russians have wanted--
they have good experience
on space stations,
they understand the
space station's design,
space station is
how you learn how
to build interplanetary
space ships.
They understand that.
So they've wanted to do
year-long missions on ISS
now for the last decade.
And they have been fighting
with the United States and NASA
for a decade, who says no.
NASA didn't want to do it.
Just didn't want to do it.
It's too risky.
The bureaucracy at
NASA just didn't
want to take the extra chance.
So for a decade this
cooperative effort
wasn't getting much done.
Well finally, a year
ago, NASA finally
agreed to a year-long mission.
So we're going to see a
year-long mission next year
on ISS, with an American
and Russian astronaut.
>>NOORY: They're going
to stay for a year.
>>ZIMMERMAN: They're
going to stay for a year.
And the idea is to
simulate what it
would be like to travel
to Mars and back.
What does it do to the body?
>>NOORY: Wouldn't
they go crazy, Bob?
>>ZIMMERMAN: No, not at all.
I mean--
>>NOORY: I would.
>>ZIMMERMAN: No.
Well, you know, human
beings were traveling
across the ocean, whalers would
go out for a year and a half.
They don't go crazy.
People are more
resilient than that.
I mean, I think our
generation is influenced
by lot of bad science
fiction from the '50s, which
said people would go crazy.
People won't go crazy.
But there are issues
you need to learn.
>>NOORY: There are issues.
>>ZIMMERMAN: There are issues.
There are issues
of medical, body--
the body has problems
with weightlessness.
We need to learn how
to deal with that.
So that's why you need
a year-long mission.
But this gets back to why
the cooperation is a problem,
because it took almost
a decade of negotiation.
>>NOORY: It took 10
years to go for one year.
>>ZIMMERMAN: To go for one year.
And what really should
have been happening
is from day one we
should've been upping
the lengths of missions on ISS
to one year, to two years--
>>NOORY: Right.
>>ZIMMERMAN: --to three years.
And so you get a--
it takes three years
to do a three-year mission.
Well, we spent a decade
on ISS without doing that.
Now we got to start doing it.
We lose time by wasting time.
You have your-- for
example, the Russians,
when they had their
own space station,
they didn't do it cooperatively.
They ramped up the
lengths of their missions.
They did year-long
missions on Mir.
And the Chinese with
their space station
are probably going to do
the year-long missions.
>>NOORY: They're
building one too?
>>ZIMMERMAN: They're
building one too.
They did their first
prototype modules in orbit.
They've done two
missions to that module.
They're going to do one more.
And then they're
going to follow it up
with a Mir-like upgrade
which, once again, is designed
with the idea that it's an
interplanetary spaceship
prototype.
How do you build--
>>NOORY: Is that why
they're building these ISS?
>>ZIMMERMAN: No, well that's
the funny story, George.
A space station really is
a prototype interplanetary
spaceship.
This is what leaving
Earth all about.
What leaving Earth
was all about.
So you have to be aware of that.
If you're going to put human
beings in Earth for a year,
or six months, the only reason
you're doing it right now
is to learn the medical
and engineering facts
you need to know to
build a spaceship,
an interplanetary spaceship.
So Mir was built
with that in mind.
The Chinese space station is
being built with that in mind.
But because of the
politics at NASA,
ISS was not built
with that in mind.
ISS is very closely
tied to the ground.
You have computer
systems, mission control
runs that station.
Well, if you're building
interplanetary spaceship
and you want to go to Mars, that
ship orbiting Mars cannot be
run from the ground on Earth.
It has to be
independent of that.
So in that sense,
ISS is a failure.
It never can tell
us what we need
to know to build an
interplanetary spaceship.
>>NOORY: And it's easier
to launch from space.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Absolutely
>>NOORY: To go to Mars, right?
>>ZIMMERMAN: That's right.
I mean, the idea is you assemble
your spaceship in Earth orbit,
and once assembled,
it's much easier
then to attach rockets and send
it out to the other planets.
>>NOORY: Sounds monumental.
>>ZIMMERMAN: It is monu-- but,
you know, it's what humans do.
I think we should do
monumental things.
And this is an example
of that monumentalness.
And from ISS we can
learn a great deal
about how to build an
interplanetary spaceship,
but we're always going to have
some difficulties because some
of the engineering is
not focused on that.
And that's our
limitation unfortunately.
>>NOORY: How would you fuel
a spacecraft like that?
>>ZIMMERMAN: How would you fuel?
Well, I mean it depends
on how it's built.
For one thing, for
electrical power
they focus on solar power.
But once you get out farther
into the solar system,
you get too far
away from the sun,
solar power is not as efficient.
>>NOORY: It's not going to work.
>>ZIMMERMAN: It's
not going to work.
So that's why they use
the small nuclear powered
electrical generators.
That's what Cassini
around Saturn uses.
That's what the Jupiter orbiter
that's on its way to Jupiter
now.
>>NOORY: And they
seem to last forever.
>>ZIMMERMAN: They can
last up to 30, 40 years.
It's very robust
technology right now,
we know how to use it.
So that's another possibility.
But you have other issues
that are much more difficult.
You have to deal with radiation.
If you're going to
go to-- if you're
going to travel outside the
Van Allen belts that protect us
in the Earth's magnetic
field, then the human beings,
you're going to have some kind
of shielding in that spaceship
to protect the
humans while they're
traveling from planet to planet.
Well how do we build that?
We actually don't
know right now.
>>NOORY: We don't know.
>>ZIMMERMAN: The
Russians learned on Mir
that you could actually
use the storage
batteries of your solar panels
as shielding because they're
lead acid batteries
and they actually
protect you from the radiation.
So they did is they concentrated
the batteries on one
particular module.
And if there was going
to be a solar flare--
>>NOORY: That's where they go.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Asutronauts
would go into that module.
So that's one possible
solution to this,
but there's a lot more
research that has to be done.
Then there's the medical issues.
Weightlessness, you
start to lose bone mass.
Your bones start
to become brittle.
You go for a long enough period
of time in weightlessness you
cannot come back to Earth.
We have to learn how to
solve that problem before we
can go explore space.
>>NOORY: And it's
a real problem.
>>ZIMMERMAN: It's an
absolutely real problem,
there's no question about it.
ISS, some of the research
that's going on right now,
is going to teach us how
to solve that problem.
And that will actually
be good for here
on Earth-- osteoporosis.
It has direct bearings.
If you can learn how to keep the
bones strong in weightlessness,
you're probably
also going to learn
how to keep the bones
strong when you get old.
>>NOORY: And supplements
alone won't help, will they?
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well
right now supplements
have been tried with the
Russians and the Americans
and they have some bonus
but they don't quite
solve the problem.
Exercise seems to help
but it doesn't quite
solve the problem.
It's a major medical problem
that has to researched.
>>NOORY: Were humans
made to travel in space?
>>ZIMMERMAN: It appears not.
That's the issue.
>>NOORY: That's the issue.
>>ZIMMERMAN: There are issues
of cardiovascular system,
the balance system of the body.
Once again, the bones, they
can become brittle and weak.
There are a lot of
issues that-- the vision.
We're finding out
that weightlessness
seems to have a very deleterious
effect on astronaut vision.
Some astronauts have had
serious vision problems.
Research can solve
these problems,
but we need to do that
research starting now.
>>NOORY: Well maybe we weren't
made to leave the planet, Bob.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Oh, are you saying
that if God had given us wings
we would fly.
>>NOORY: We'd be flying.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well, that's--
>>NOORY: Like gossamer.
>>ZIMMERMAN: Well,
you see, the thing
is what did Asimo-- what
did Robert Clock say?
When a scientist says it's
impossible, it's impossible,
he just means it's going to take
a little bit longer to solve.
And so human beings, a man's
reach should exceed his grasp,
but what's a heavens for?
We want to try to reach
for greater things.
So these are
obstacles in our way.
It's behind the black,
George, once again.
So, yes.
We find out that
weightlessness is not
a good thing for the human body.
Well that doesn't mean
we should give up.
That means we should
reach behind the black
to try to figure
out how to solve it.
>>NOORY: I agree.
>>ZIMMERMAN: I know you'd agree.
Human beings are adaptable,
that's our greatest strength.
And that's when we find a
problem, solve the problem.
Don't let it bother
you, solve the problem.
And that's what space is
teaching us in this case.
And there's a whole
universe out there
for us to inhabit and
explore and enjoy.
And therefore,
let's not stop here.
Let's get there so we can learn
how to take advantage of it.
>>NOORY: Bob
Zimmerman, thank you
for being on "Beyond Belief."
>>ZIMMERMAN: My pleasure.
>>NOORY: Appreciate it.
So maybe one day mankind
will indeed leave the planet.
Then again, maybe not.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."